This past weekend, I went to a book talk at Printed Matter about a book called “Poetic Computation: Reader” by Taeyoon Choi. I originally thought the talk would be about similarities between poetry and coding, which was the content of his book, and though this was touched on, the talk turned out to be more about the form of the book and the design process leading up to its creation. 

The book is virtual, meant to be read in a web browser, and is very different from the minimally-interactive scrolling format of a blog or other standard website. Certain aspects of physical books are replicated in the web design, and the typeface and text are all user-customizable. Highlighting and annotation is possible, and interactive references are included on the side of the book pages. Annotations and other notes can be saved and exported as a pdf, too. 

This idea of a new form of book had me thinking of our discussion about books from the previous class as well as Johanna Drucker’s discussions of novel web reading interfaces found in “Graphesis.” There, she explores how the traditional book form grew out of very specific needs for knowledge communication, mentioning further that today we should reflect on what we truly need from web interfaces, not simply rely on what we have currently. Choi felt similarly, saying that the scrolling format grew naturally from the way html code is structured rather than an analysis of the desired reading experience of the user. 

The actual content of the book, too, touched on a few ideas found in Paul Ford’s “What is Code?” Choi broke down the dichotomy between coding and more “humanistic” disciplines, analyzing how coding, with its abstraction, elegant simplicity, and focus on the form of the text that makes up the code (“clean code”), is in many ways similar to writing poetry. I’ve always approached coding rather begrudgingly in the past, to a large extent because of the overly technical culture and reputation surrounding it. Seeing coding described in a way such as Choi’s felt very refreshing, and I feel that I will now approach the discipline with a newfound curiosity. 

The book is free online and can be found here: http://poeticcomputation.info/
